a model but not a straitjacket for the typical client for the Changing Lives program is someone who experiences repetitive charges for unnecessary crimes.
Usually the judge has a little alternative but to sentence such a client to jail for a period of anywhere up to two, two and a half years.
The client has to be committed to change.
In other words, in some sense he has to have hit bottom and is dissatisfied with the repetitive nature of the trouble he gets into and has a positive desire to change.
He has to convince the judge of this.
Needs enough reading ability to obtain
and finish a 200-page book in a two-week period.
And he needs transportation to the program.
So that's the model.
How do you get involved?
I'm a defense attorney.
The carrot for the defense attorney is a good judge will give, will suspend or
not impose a jail sentence in return for placing the client on probation.
The judges that do this know that there's a substantial chance of and a very important improvement in the social functioning of the clients that are selected.
Studies have been done indicating a recidivism rate of 20 percent as compared to 45 or higher, which is amazing.
The group chosen
tend to become arrested and involved in the district court system on some level, anywhere from annually to two or three times a year.
Annually to two or three times a year.
Anecdotally, many of the clients we meet exhibit a much stronger sense of self-confidence, self-worth.
From reading?
From reading and also from discussion.
There are several elements here.
that cannot be quantified very well.
For instance, the setting in a university.
Many of these men don't have GEDs, but when they enter the university on the first night, they ask themselves, why am I even here?
When they leave tonight, they know they belong.
They feel and they are able to complete a college-level English course.
The presence of the judge, there's no judge here tonight, unfortunately.
Judge Cain usually attends.
He does, huh?
He does, and he sits down as one of the men.
Wow.
As another student, another reader of the book.
Does he participate in the discussion?
Completely.
Because I wish he were here tonight.
He's extremely intelligent.
His language is elevated, but he doesn't use that language or his intelligence to dominate or harm others.
He uses it as part of... To intimidate, yeah.
No, he brings everyone up.
Okay.
You can just tell me if his name is like this.
Yeah, my name is Val.
Actually, Wilder, Korea, but they call me Val.
Okay.
Your insights, it looks to me like you took this pretty seriously.
Was it fear or was it pleasure for you?
No, actually, I found out about the class.
Like I said, I was in prison at the time.
I read about it in the paper.
I took it like I opened the paper.
You wrote a paper about this?
No, it was in the newspaper, an article about the program itself.
Oh, yeah?
Is this on the website?
Is this something I can get?
They do have a website.
Okay, but is there a paper?
No, no, no, no, no.
There was an article about it in the newspaper.
Oh, I know.
You said you wrote a paper.
No, no, no.
There was an article about it.
May I show you a couple more pictures?
Yeah.
Oh, you can take it right next to there, because that's where I'm from.
It's ready.
Yeah, I read an article about it, and while I was reading the article, it was just coincidence that that's the page that I happened to open the newspaper to, and I've seen something that's like changing lives to literature.
Just the key word was literature, so I read about it, and then I seen that it was for people who have never been in trouble before that were, you know, potential good products of this program, like
If I was to get in this program, it'd be good for me.
Like I said, I wrote the letter to him and gave it to my lawyer.
This is why you were in prison?
Hmm?
This is why you were incarcerated?
I was incarcerated because of drugs.
Yeah.
While I was in there, I had a lot of time to think.
I wasn't asking what it was for.
You told me.
I made mistakes.
I was in prison because of drugs.
While I was in there, I had a lot of time to reflect.
I was a college student.
Where did you go to school?
I actually went in here.
I was teaching in New Bedford High School.
Things went wrong and I started making my little wrong decisions.
That's where it landed me.
So, the program basically, in the newspaper, the article is talking about how the program is designed for people who have never been in trouble before, to before they become a constant, and trapped in the revolving doors of the jail system to find a way to get out.
So, like, I really wanted this program to do something for me, because I know that I've always been an educated young man, and, you know, I've made correct decisions.
Excuse me.
Yeah, so I thought that this program, you know, this could be a good book, right?
I'll use this in a book.
Yeah, sounds good.
I'll buy the book.
Well, I'll give you the book.
All right.
So, yeah, basically I thought, like, this program would be good for me.
And like I told you, the first week I came, I researched the program a little bit online before I came in.
And I had my own perceptions of what the program would be like as far as, um,
Nice to meet you, man.
Good to be on the program with you.
Thank you.
It was my pleasure being here, too.
You're a very smart guy.
You, too, man.
Stay out of trouble.
I don't want to see you in there.
I never want to run into you in there.
I didn't.
I mean, this helped change my life in different ways.
This changed my life.
You know what I mean?
Everyone's got their own way of being popular.
I ain't going to be back in there.
What was that you were just showing?
I'm going to make a mistake.
You know, I'm sure you can figure it out.
It's one of those things.
You take care of yourself.
Everyone wants to try that end of that.
That road of life.
Yep, definitely.
This program has been real good for the both of us.
I came here and never knew this guy.
Hopefully I run into you on good terms.
Yeah.
Definitely.
Bobby is a friend of mine.
That's the only time I'm going to be talking to him is hanging out with him.
Well, you used to have your open case going, right?
Yeah.
I'll find out how you're going through Bobby.
It'll be off in February.
I'm out of here.
I won't be here, but the end of next time I'll be gone.
I'll be someplace warm for next Wednesday.
All right, cool.
Take it easy.
So what do you want to do?
Well, actually now... You've got a good future, man.
You've got a good mind.
I'm a professional reader.
I've written four books.
I've spent my life writing and reading.
I'm currently writing a short story.
I've got a pretty good eye for... I write poetry.
I've been writing poetry since second grade.
I'm 26 years old now.
You're right on it.
Your perceptions are really excellent.
My main goal right now is to take my mistakes that I've made and
teach young kids.
I'm working on opening my own non-profit organization.
I've given Professor Robert Waxlow the blueprint to it.
His son is a lawyer and his brother is going to look over it for me.
He has a judge that works in the juvenile court system that has money that's been allocated to her through certain grants to start a non-profit so I might be able to work with her.
Do you use books as part of your... Yes, definitely.
I wasn't planning on using books.
I was planning on doing more tutoring
helping kids with their actual schoolwork and all that and making sure they stay in school and decide to go to college and all that.
But since I've been in this class, I feel like discussion.
Reading and then having the discussion afterwards is a lot more better than just reading on its own.
What you said there really struck me there is that you said that you're expecting to have what you had in college, which is we read the book and we come in and there's going to be one right answer.
He's going to tell us what happened, but instead he came in and he challenged you to
participate and give your own perceptions of what you read.
Yes.
And everybody had a different perception.
And you thought that was cool.
You liked that.
That was cool.
Yeah, that was definitely... Talk a little bit about that, if you don't mind.
It's cool.
It's like I was saying in the class that it's strange that you can have six different people or more read the same book.
But yet, if you ask every single one of those people what they got from that book, everyone would have a different story.
that came from that book.
It's good, because... It's about the power of literature, because it has a way of impacting, or influencing, or resonating... Different people in different ways.
And it shows how that person's particular background... You are what you do.
You make what you read.
Rather than... The writer could have his own intention, but when he sits down and he pens something in that book, he never knows.
He can never imagine the
power that book could have on different people because he writes it with one intention in mind, his perspective and his point of view.
But the words that he puts down on paper, even though it's the same words that so many different people are reading, every single person is going to have their own perception of that book.
I guess it's like a fingerprint.
You know, two-hour life.
Fantastic.
And were there any favorites in the course?
My favorite was The Old Man and the Sea.
Oh, and what was there in particular about that?
It was about an old man who, he had his beliefs and, you know, even though things weren't always going right for him and, you know, everybody would make fun of him and, you know, he was failing at everything else and he was getting old, he wouldn't give up.
He was a fighter.
And, you know, basically,
You know, right now, I'm at a point in my life where, in comparison to maybe four or five years ago, where I was doing good, you know, I was president of associations here at the school.
I was actively involved in a lot of political things on campus, and, you know, I was working.
I had a nice job already in my major, and I was working, and, you know, I had a nice car, and I had my whole family behind me.
And now it's four years later, you know, I'm just being released from prison.
I don't have a car no more.
How much time did you do?
Mm-hmm.
I only did two months, but I'm only, like I said, I'm only out on bail right now.
I'm still facing time complications.
But this program is going to help me when I do go.
And I was asked, being that I had a college background, when I first started this class.
I'm the oldest one in the class, and I did have the college background.
I was asked from the two professors and my probation officer to be the standout student.
that was asked of me, and I said, that's what I'll do, and I feel that I've accomplished that.
Where did you do your time?
In that street correctional facility.
Yes.
Sucky thing was, it was right across the street from where I lived.
Well, my aunt's house, but where I grew up in my aunt's house.
So you say you're from the Cape Verde?
Yes, I'm from the Cape Verde.
How long have you been here?
I've been here since 1981.
I came when I was four years old.
How do I get in touch with you?
You got an email address?
I can give you an email and my cell phone number.
My name is Nick, N-I-C-T.
My email is M-A-G-A-S-O-D-A-D-E at hotmail.com.
And my cell phone is 774-201-915.
Good.
All right, excellent.
I know you're going to run.
And then, matasodadi, means this word means to miss something, and this word means to kill.
So basically, kill the feeling of missing something.
And it's a term we often use in my language, which for people that live here, who've migrated from their home, we want to kill the feeling of missing where we're from.
So, matasodadi, so that's what they say.
When you're going to vacation to Cape Verde,
you're going there to kill the feeling of missing K. Brett.
Have you been successful at that, do you think?
Every time I go back, I've been back a few times.
My father still isn't there.
My father retired two years ago as the Secretary of Defense for K. Brett.
Wow.
Well, I think you're going to do it.
I'm a pretty good judge of character, I have to say.
I'm not saying I like being in jail, but being caught
And going to jail for two months and having that time to reflect was the worst good thing that could have happened to me in my life.
The worst good thing?
The worst good thing.
How long had you been misbehaving, shall we say?
It had been a year, a year and a half.
And in that year, like, I was the only one that failed to realize all the things I was losing.
I lost my license.
I lost my car.
Almost lost my girl.
I lost my family's faith in me.
I lost, you know, a lot of friends, you know.
I lost so many things, but it wasn't until I lost my freedom there.
And was this drug use that you had?
No.
The thing that happened was, I... Don't mind my asking, don't... Prior to graduating college, I got a job in my major.
I was working in Boston, making $43,000, living in the Beckford.
And I worked there for a year and a half, and then I was laid off.
So being young,
I didn't know what to do with all that money, you know, making that much money.
I was going out partying, wasting it, doing all this, doing all that.
And then reality snapped back in because now I have to get another job.
Another job, I didn't make one third of what I was making in Boston.
So in order to continue to live the lifestyle I was living at $43,000, I had to do what I had to do, which wasn't the right decision.
Prior to that, I had never smoked drugs.
I never did drugs.
So you never did them?
No.
I drink.
Writers love to drink.
That's what they say.
It was basically something like that.
I appreciate your honesty with me.
They busted you down here, and so it goes.
You've seen the light?
I've seen the light.
Since I've been out, I've been doing this.
I'm working on getting back into school, finishing my last few credits that I owe.
I've been going to church.
I go to work.
I don't want to wake up and go to work, but I go.
And what kind of work did you see doing that?
Well, now, you know, I've always had something to fall back on.
First thing I did was when I was 16, I went and got licensed to be a barber because I was good at it.
You know, back then, I used to do everything that I needed to do.
Like, I could cut here, get a license, you know, do it the right way.
You can read, you're good in school, go to college.
I did that.
And I won't use your full name in my piece.
Yeah, okay.
Maybe you should put the valve.
And you don't mind my using your picture?
No, I don't mind that at all.
Yeah, I don't mind that at all.
I want to let people know what I went through and the fact that
I'm trying to make a change.
I talk to a lot of people.
I work in a Bible study.
That's my medium.
And can you definitely say that the books have helped you come out of this?
Books and the programming itself.
Because the book alone wouldn't have done it.
It's the conversation.
Like I said, you could read the book in class, pass it in and get a grade and leave.
but you don't get that, you don't get the same thing out of the book until you just stuck it with other people and see that the same, other people read the same book in the same way, came wearing something different.
That's great.
Okay.
Go meet your friend, your girlfriend.
Mainly black.
Dependency for people that are really close to the kind of ethnic background, black, African-American.
I wish we had a better Spanish book.
They identify a little bit with Santiago, but... For this course, yeah.
Used house on Maringo Street for a woman.
Yeah, Nick, I'm going to give you my card.
I need to get going now.
Well, I might.
I probably definitely will be in touch.
That number I drafted is my extension, so, you know, you get the automated thing, you can go direct to me.
And, um... No, but I don't remember mine.
But I'll give you my home email.
Give me my home email.
Not at all.
What do you see?
I know you had mentioned, the book sounds great, generally, what you think.
You got most of the work done on your book already, right?
Yeah.
A chapter on Harold Lone.
No, I see Harold.
Harold.
I worked him in with Helen Bendler, the woman at Harvard, and Christopher Ricks, who was there.
Oh, yeah.
It's a new book on Dylan.
Yeah, well, I saw that book on Dylan.
I thought he was treating him like poetry.
Oh, yeah.
And it's amazing.
Well, whatever.
He's a good copy.
One of the best-read people in the world.
Oh, absolutely.
Yeah, please.
Thanks a lot.
Nice to meet you.
Thank you.
Have a great holiday.
Yeah.
as they try to impress each other and us with... Yeah, over the years, again, especially, this group is somewhat, you know, not the most typical group.
You know, the core group here is a couple of guys in particular, but there are certain things, as Chuck was suggesting,
in the form of that, one having to do with just the use of language, you can see over the 12-week period, there's a change in the use of language.
They usually begin to feel more comfortable with it.
And the way they pace themselves, the first night they're often talking over each other, but then they get that sense of, you know, when to pause, when you get somebody else in.
The other really remarkable thing I've seen in almost all the classes is
The first few weeks that come in, you can almost always, they're standing on the car, waiting, or out early in the year, if it's warm, it's the outside, and a lot of other students will be coming in for the evening courses, and you can almost always pick out who's going to be in the changing lives, because they look different, they stand differently, they tend to dress differently, but by the, you're into this half, you know, six weeks or so, and suddenly, if you didn't know,
You know, this kind of unconscious sense of assimilation.
And it's not just the clothing.
It's the way they look, the way they're standing.
There's just a different sensibility operating there.
And have all of these kids actually spent some time behind bars?
Every one of them.
He said he did two months.
He was very lucky.
Could have been a lot longer than that.
I snatched him from the jaws of... And what was Kyle's offense?
Well, depending on who you believe, he either had a lot of rings on or brass knuckles, and depending on who you believe, there was also a knife involved.
Well, there wasn't.
So there's some assault issues.
Looking like a true lawyer.
So it was alleged that there might have been some assault issues involved, right?
Assault and battery are the dangerous ones.
Yeah, I'm just trying to figure, just for myself, figure out.
Juvenile record, gang issues, you saw the paint.
Yeah, I was like, what is that picture by then?
I was trying to figure it out.
I think it's him.
It's him.
Is that really?
See the things you're trying to figure out when you're sitting here, getting a...
They may not have gone to jail before, but in the case at hand, they're usually facing jail.
And serious jail, right?
We're talking jail now.
Well, we're talking jail, not prison.
So three months, six months, a year, perhaps?
It's serious, though, in our system, because if they end up in Ash Street, you're looking at a 200-year-old facility designed for 150 members.
I don't think how many.
The local sheriff is a refugee from...
The Stone Age.
I mean, North Carolina.
Oh, that explains it.
He believes, Monco Sheriff is an interesting guy who has argued that it's a good thing to put these guys in chains.
And he's actually had chain gangs out on the street here, which people have obviously... Massachusetts, huh?
You got a chain gang, you got, if you need something painted, like a church or whatever, or somebody's house, they'll paint it for you.
In chains?
In chains.
Wow.
In gangs, yeah.
I didn't think we had that in Massachusetts.
Yeah, it's very spiritually uplifting.
All you have to do is listen to the sheriff.
My daughter went to college in Virginia, and we'd be driving down there, and there'd be bus out there.
Department of Corrections, you'd see two guys out there with rifles, and these guys chained out there cleaning
There were concerns early in the program about bringing convicted criminals onto a university.
Did that raise safety concerns?
And there have been some tense moments.
There was that class when two gang members from opposite gangs invested
considering either killing themselves here or taking it outside.
And didn't they shake hands and agree to get through the class?
Please, don't have no blood on the table here.
And they did get through the class, as I recall.
Actually, it worked out fine.
They said they didn't know each other at all.
They didn't know each other's names.
That's the beauty of it, though, is that they don't.
And that frees them, really.
And do you pointedly not...
Do you call them by name?
Yeah, I do.
Yeah, I mean, that's my... I do do that consciously.
I've found that for whatever reason, it just seems to be... A little bit of anonymity, you think, is productive.
Well, yeah, because I hadn't thought about this when we started the program, but over the first couple of years, one thing I did realize, and it's probably obvious now, I didn't think about it, was that whenever we were talking about a character, a book, at some other level,
people were talking about themselves, you know, because they were seeing through the character their own experience, their own life.
Little like what this guy was saying.
I think we pretend to map our story on others.
And so that gave them some level of protection.
It was very different.
Most women experienced some kind of therapy groups.
And this is clearly not a therapy group.
And I think part of the benefit and the power of it is that they are protected at that level
You're always talking through the character, even though you're in some other level talking about yourself.
And you're looking at all these dimensions of people seeing you as well as you examining yourself as you go through the story.
And in the same context, I thought, at least, about it in terms of names and other things.
I was saying, well, they'll feel good about being in the room.
They come together as a community a little bit at that level.
Clearly, they're willing to argue for each other.
But it's probably just as well that they don't have that kind of personal friendship because it does give them one more defense.
They can continue to feel open and talk and say things and not be worried that they're exposing themselves too much because they have a little bit of that anonymity and they also have the protection of the story itself as they talk through the character.
It's like the person you meet on the airplane.
And then you suddenly find yourself divulging things that you'd never say to anybody that you knew.
And then it is two ships passing in the night.
Oh, it's more intense than that.
I'd call it academic respect.
When a person speaks, he's presenting words that can be attacked by others around the table, but one is not attacked personally.
You don't have to lay yourself on the table.
And you can put up trial balloons that
Is there an arc to the stories?
Do you really work very hard about the order of how you're presenting them?
Well, there are clearly connections among the stories.
Which were pretty evident, were even brought out.
Yeah, it's pretty obvious.
So thematically, they grow, and one story makes the map itself on another story as well as individual matters.
But the other thing that I do try to
to accomplish, although last night is, again, a little different, is, in terms of an arc, is trying to start with stories that are going to be a little easier and shorter and easier in terms of language.
So something like Greasy Lake, which is an interesting story.
It's kind of short, and they get into it, and it's not, it's got some interesting language, but it's not extraordinarily difficult.
And then we'll go to Asanae of Mice and Man, which is also not too tough for the whole man to see, and then slowly move to
The longer work, anyway, like deliverance.
Well, and they had two weeks to do deliverance.
That was a pretty good assignment there.
It is, for them, especially.
That's what saved the bacon.
Yeah, that was Wayne's out, because, you know, what did you do?
We have 40 pages, and we just did this 325-page book.
You should forget that you heard that, by the way.
Yeah, that's one that you shouldn't.
That one should never find its way into Frank, that Wayne cut him any slack.
Certainly the challenges and the insurmountable problems that the book's raised.
I say the obvious.
The way this thing is coming together, it's not a blow-by-blow.
Good.
I think it's pretty well stated.
The quote is, it's the only time in my life I've ever seen a situation where if you don't read the book, you'd stand a very real possibility of going to jail.
That's a hell of a lot better than, you know, his... But he had to do it.
That was essential.
That had to be done.
Oh, no.
I did it.
especially with me here, it had to be, because it was pretty obvious to me that he had two slackers here.
And I was saying to myself, well, how the hell are they going to get away with that?
Well, he does do that.
There's a little bit of a good cough, bad cough routine here, too, because I found it to be very helpful.
As a probation officer, he's the guy.
He has to be.
You've got to do that kind of thing.
And in my role, I don't have to do that.
In a way, I count on him to do that.
So I remain the guy who's going to
talk about the literature with these guys and sort of get into that part of it, but I don't have to.
The enforcement is Wayne's job, isn't it?
And that's why he's here.
He's here for the session?
It is.
Oh, yeah.
It's not the only reason why he's here, but he does represent that.
But is it a requirement of the program that... It's not required that any probation officer be here, but generally, the best situation, we're going to have a...
professor, a probation officer, and a judge.
We have a judge here tonight, but there wasn't.
In this cycle, for various reasons, we've only had one time a judge here.
When we started the program, we did have a judge who was part of the group that came and started the program.
It was very interesting, because now you've got that up.
That's another important voice at the table as well.
And he sort of plays the
very interesting role, because as a judge, these guys are ordinarily looking at him, or any judge, as the, you know, you talk about stereotypes, the, you know, the authoritative figure in Doc Roe, who the Senate's made to jail, or, you know, that's their view of it.
But slowly, over the course of the weeks, the discussion, it's as if, especially at the best moments, all these
All the roles and all the stereotypes, you know, begin to drop, and what you have are just human voices exchanging ideas and perspectives, and suddenly the judge is not the judge.
He's another human being with a very interesting point of view.
And the judge also hears the criminal offenders.
You know, this guy is no longer the criminal offender.
He's got some really interesting ideas.
At the very best moment, and I think, again, this is part of the power of literature, you've got a situation where everyone around the table has, in a sense, dropped all the masks.
What you have is suddenly a human voice in various manifestations, people listening to each other, people articulating ideas, and you have, at its essence, the human community come together feeling the rhythm of the human heart.
I'm absolutely sure that's what happened at the best moment.
And it comes out of literature.
I think literature is responsible.
You know, you just know that it can happen and it does happen.
It doesn't happen every moment, it doesn't happen every session, but it happens.
And when it does, in my view, it's really because of the literature.
Is it pretty much the same reading list?
We get bored and change it.
Yeah, we change it.
But it's usually something like that.
You know, we're going to use Sea Wolf, you know, by Jacqueline.
We didn't use that for various reasons, but that's one that we sometimes use.
We use some Raymond Carver stories sometimes.
Bob Clever-Coles uses Carver and everything.
Yeah.
James Agee.
Yeah, there are a lot of
Yeah, a lot of good lines, good stories.
Anyone that you've seen over the course of having taught this, how many times do you think, offhand, over the years?
Probably twenty, twenty-five.
You know, it's been about close to fourteen years now.
We do at least two years or so.
Close to thirty.
Any works that are perennial favorites?
I think the old man is indispensable.
Oh, man, he is certainly one of the favorites.
Because of the character, because of Santiago.
Especially, again, I think it was a good point we got onto about the reading and then the discussion of reading.
Because people read it, and they love, you know, there's something interesting about Santiago.
But when we start talking about this guy, he really comes alive, and people understand the heroic nature of his endurance, you know, in the sense that
And here's a guy who's been getting up for almost three months, going out every morning, hasn't caught anything, but yet he's willing to go out and try again.
That's the beginning.
How many people will, after a week or two, sort of give up?
You hear the alarm clock, and then you go back into bed.
So that sense of the heroism and the sense, you know, the endurance and the pain that the guy's going through, and
And the fact that he's willing to do that really becomes increasingly attractive to think about it entirely.
And one of my favorite stories in the course is related to that.
And I think it really helps to define what happens in the course.
This guy comes in one night after we had talked about, oh, man, this thing.
And I don't know if I've told you this story before.
He said, look, before we get started, I've just got to tell you this one thing that happened to me.
Many of you probably know, but I don't know.
drug addict for a very long time.
I've been battling it.
I've been clean for six months or a year.
But I've really been feeling depressed lately.
I was walking down the main street of New Testament last week, and this was after my phone, and he said, I came to Connor, a crucial Connor, and I paused.
I was just feeling overwhelmingly depressed, and I knew
that I ought to have to do is sort of make a turn to the right.
It's as if I heard the siren, you know, the call from my old neighborhood.
And I was drawn to it.
And I just, I could hear that voice.
And at that corner, I was just about ready to turn.
Then I heard this other voice, he said.
I think it was talking metaphorically at that moment.
I hope.
And he said it was the voice of Sandia.
And he said what I, you know, I heard, it was like, he was, what he was,
You know, he's calling to me, and I started thinking about Santiago, and I kept saying to myself, well, you know, I know what he went through.
I know what he thought.
And he looked at me.
I remember the guy telling me.
I said, you know, Professor West, I can't tell.
It's going to happen.
You know, two weeks from now, it'll still happen.
But he said, it was that moment that I started thinking, if Santiago could do that, at least one more day, I could walk straight down...
road here and not make that track.
So essentially Santiago saved a guy's life.
Literature.
Literature saved his life.
And that character, Santiago, is embedded in that guy's heart.
I know it.
That's the connection.
And how recently did this happen?
A couple years ago.
Just remarkable, because it, to me, brought so many things about the program together.
You know, I began to think, this is part of what happens at the best moments.
around the table.
And that's how literature can save life.
And it does.
And it changes guy's life.
It saved his life.
Salvation is there.
The anecdote that Mike Leahy, the probation officer over in Florida, told me about, he, his supervisor came down unexpectedly from Boston one day and said, you know, I'm going with you today.
And this guy who had been through the programs
was on his list of people to see.
So they went to the guy's house.
That was the last call of the day.
And it's a third floor walk up in Florida.
The guy did his thing.
They're all set to leave.
And the guy tugged on Mike's lead.
He says, I want to show you something.
They walk through the mess of his house, the third floor.
They get to the back room.
He opens up a door with all the books.
The guy had bought at yard sale.
He says, I've bred three quarters of them.
and I'm going to read all of them before I'm through.
And Mike said, and that was really good.
He said, but the best part was I saw him after that, and his son was heading down the same path that the father was on.
And when he saw his father turn, he started reading the books his father was reading, and they started talking about them.
And he said, that to me is the quintessential story of changing lines through literature.
I mean, there's a whole family, there's two generations impacted by one court.
It's a story that's echoed in various ways all around.
The human ties we've made, the people we've wanted to respect and like and admire at this table, go way beyond any statistic of recidivism ever created.
It's a matter of trying to translate that to other people.
And that's the problem.
We're asking them to take a chance.
We're asking them to risk their... Does it work?
There's no guarantee with any individual.
Oh, with anything.
And the women have comparable kinds of stories, I'm sure.
And the reading list there is formulated by... Well, it's a very... I think of it as a very grassroots operation, in any case.
So wherever one of these springs up, you know,
facilitate a professor on a campus in whatever district or locality.
It's pretty, I try to give them what advice and what wisdom they might have, but in the end, it's their choice in terms of what books they want to use.
Imagine they're going to be passionate about the books that they want to use.
We have extensive reading lists so they can make those choices that even though they don't have to use.
And the result is that each group really has
different books based apart on the choices that the facilitator wants to make out of their own passion.
And also, again, in terms of the group itself, if it's a women's group, they're going to obviously want to shape it around.
Sure.
If it's an ethnic minority, they'll often think a little, at least, about the mix.
There's a seminar day once or twice a year at a conference center at Northeastern University, and academics and probation officers and judges from around the country will collect that.
And my impression of these people is that they're all highly intellectual, and they're very independent.
They all have their own proud take on how they go about this program.
There is no set series of commands from above.
This is the original table at which the program was created, and yet academics from a wide variety of situations and backgrounds have been able to take this idea
and do something positive with it.
Use it as a template.
And isn't it astonishing that you have it in Texas?
That's the most, to me.
Right in the Bible, though.
It is incredible.
Yeah, it is.
It really is.
I told you that when we were talking before.
Well, I saw it on your website.
Right, look at this.
I remember when those guys came up originally from Texas.
They said, you know, they're interesting.
They wanted to come up.
I kept saying to them,
So, you know, it's one thing to have this program going to Massachusetts for all time.
I think we're going to make a point out of that.
Yeah, because I can see it.
If we can ever get the program going in Texas, that's a whole different world now.
I can just see a lot of my critics saying, look at him, he's got this chapter, Reach Out and Read, Massachusetts Operation, this one, Massachusetts Operation, Eating Out Liberals, that's what he's exploring.
Well, I've got an essay, I think it's up on the web somewhere, it's a short one.
It's published also, it's kind of obvious people.
They had a paragraph about just that kind of thing.
I was trying to make the point that this does transcend politics.
What we're really talking about here is, again, the power of literature, and it's very interesting that both people from the left, liberal wing, politically, and people from the right, often very, very conservative, have embraced this program.
And I had a sentence at two a time about, you know, these Texas judges were willing, and in many cases have, actually, they take capital cases and send people to their death.
And those are the same judges who are embracing this program.
And they believe, and probably more deeply than some of the judges in Massachusetts who are involved with this, that somehow,
Our story, our literature can affect some kind of salvation.
I think that's the way they're thinking about this.
But they, from the far right, embrace it just as well as the other people, you know, liberal side.
I've always believed literature really does transcend the politics anyway.
It's not about something, the universal quality of the literature and the complexity of it.
Listen, guys, I'm going to head back to
All right.
Oh, good.
Thank you.
Glad to have you.